document optimistic confirmation and slashing roadmap (#10164)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/proposals/optimistic-confirmation-and-slashing.md

# Optimistic Confirmation and Slashing

Progress on optimistic confirmation can be tracked here

https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/projects/52

> At the end of May, the mainnet is moving to 1.1, and TdS is moving
> to 1.2. With 1.2, TdS will behave as if we have 1-block conf as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of May, the mainnet-beta is moving to 1.1, and testnet is moving
to 1.2. With 1.2, testnet will behave as if we have 1-block conf as
```

long as no more than 4.66% of the validators are acting maliciously.
Applications can assume that 2/3+ votes observed in gossip confirm a
block or that at least 4.66% of the network is violating the protocol.

## How does it work?

The general idea is that validators have to continue voting, following
their last fork, unless they can construct a proof that their fork
may not reach finality. The way validators construct this proof is by
collecting votes for all the other forks, excluding their own. If
the set of valid votes represents over 1/3+X of the epoch stake weight,

> there is no way for the validators current fork to reach 2/3+ finality.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't say there's `no way`, it's possible, it's possible that some of the `1/3+X` could switch over. It's just that there's also a nonzero possibility that another fork outside of the current one can be finalized, hence why a switch is allowed.

The validator hashes the proof (creates a witness) and submits it
with their vote for the alternative fork.  If 2/3+ votes for the
same block, it is impossible for any of the nodes to construct this
proof, and therefore no node is able to switch forks and this block
will be eventually finalized.

## Tradeoffs

The safety margin is 1/3+X, where X represents the minimum amount
of stake that will be slashed in case the protocol is violated. The
tradeoff is that liveness is now reduced by 2X in the worst case.
If more than 1/3 - 2X of the network is unavailable, the network may
stall and will resume finalizing blocks after the network recovers.
So far, we haven’t observed a large unavailability hit on our
mainnet, cosmos, or tezos. For our network, which is primarily
composed of high availability systems, this seems unlikely. Currently,
we have set the threshold percentage to 4.66%, which means that

> 23.68% of the nodes have to be available for the network to continue

Reviewer 2: 33.333 - 4.6666 * 2 = 24%

Also I think this should read `at most 24% of nodes can be malicious`,  or `at least 76%` of nodes have to be correct.

`24%` is the maximum failure number, not the availability number

finalizing blocks.  For our network, which is primarily composed

> of high availability systems a 23.68 drop in availabilty seems

Reviewer 2: 23.68%

block to fail full finalization.

## Why Solana?

This approach can be built on other networks, but the implementation
complexity is significantly reduced on Solana because our votes
have provable VDF-based timeouts. It’s not clear if switching proofs
can be easily constructed in networks with weak assumptions about
time.

## Slashing roadmap

Slashing is a hard problem, and it becomes harder when the goal of
the network is to be the fastest possible implementation. The
tradeoffs are especially apparent when optimizing for latency. For
example, we would really like the validators to cast and propagate
their votes before the memory has been synced to disk, which means
that the risk of local state corruption is much higher.

Fundamentally, our goal for slashing is to slash 100% in cases where
the node is maliciously trying to violate safety rules and 0% during
routine operation. How we aim to achieve that is to first implement
slashing proofs without any automatic slashing whatsoever.

Right now, for regular consensus, after a safety violation, the
network will halt. We can analyze the data and figure out who was
responsible and propose that the stake should be slashed after

> restart. A similar approach will be used with a one-block conf. A

Reviewer 2: I would rename all the `one-block conf` to `optimistic confirmation`
